=head1 NAME

Template::Iterator - Base iterator class used by the FOREACH directive.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    my $iter = Template::Iterator->new(\@data, \%options);

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The Template::Iterator module defines a generic data iterator for use 
by the FOREACH directive.  

It may be used as the base class for custom iterators.

=head1 PUBLIC METHODS

=head2 new(\@data) 

Constructor method.  A reference to a list of values is passed as the
first parameter and subsequent get_first() and get_next() calls will return
each element. 

=head2 get_first()

Returns a ($value, $error) pair for the first item in the iterator set.
The $error returned may be zero or undefined to indicate a valid datum
was successfully returned.  Returns an error of STATUS_DONE if the list 
is empty.

=head2 get_next()

Returns a ($value, $error) pair for the next item in the iterator set.
Returns an error of STATUS_DONE if all items in the list have been 
visited.

=head2 get_all()

Returns a (\@values, $error) pair for all remaining items in the iterator 
set.  Returns an error of STATUS_DONE if all items in the list have been 
visited.

=head2 size(), max(), index(), number(), first(), last()

Return the size of the iteration set, the maximum index number (size - 1),
the current index number (0..max), the iteration number offset from 1
(index + 1, i.e. 1..size), and boolean values indicating if the current
iteration is the first or last in the set, respectively.

=head1 AUTHOR

Andy Wardley E<lt>abw@kfs.orgE<gt>

    http://www.template-toolkit.org/
    http://www.kfs.org/~abw/

=head1 REVISION

$Revision: 1.1 $

=head1 COPYRIGHT

    Copyright (C) 1996-2000 Andy Wardley.  All Rights Reserved.
    Copyright (C) 1998-2000 Canon Research Centre Europe Ltd.

This module is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.


=head1 SEE ALSO


L<Template|Template>